Let's make some measurements using one of
the simplest combinational devices: a buffer.
A buffer has a single input and a single output,
where the output will be driven with the same
digital value as the input after some small
propagation delay.
This buffer obeys the static discipline - that's
what it means to be combinational - and uses
our revised signaling specification that includes
both low and high noise margins.
The measurements will be made by setting the
input voltage to a sequence of values ranging
from 0V up to the power supply voltage.
After setting the input voltage to a particular
value, we'll wait for the output voltage to
become stable, i.e., we'll wait for the propagation
delay of the buffer.
We'll plot the result on a graph with the
input voltage on the horizontal axis and the
measured output voltage on the vertical axis.
The resulting curve is called the voltage
transfer characteristic of the buffer.
For convenience, we've marked our signal thresholds
on the two axes.
Before we start plotting points, note that
the static discipline constrains what the
voltage transfer characteristic must look
like for any combinational device.
If we wait for the propagation delay of the
device, the measured output voltage must be
a valid digital value if the input voltage
is a valid digital value - "valid in, valid
out".
We can show this graphically as shaded forbidden
regions on our graph.
Points in these regions correspond to valid
digital input voltages but invalid digital
output voltages.
So if we're measuring a legal combinational
device, none of the points in its voltage
transfer characteristic will fall within these
regions.
Okay, back to our buffer: setting the input
voltage to a value less than the low input
threshold V_IL, produces an output voltage
less than V_OL, as expected.
A digital 0 input yields a digital 0 output.
Trying a slightly higher but still valid 0
input gives a similar result.
Note that these measurements don't tell us
anything about the speed of the buffer, they
are just measuring the static behavior of
the device, not its dynamic behavior.
If we proceed to make all the additional measurements,
we get the voltage transfer characteristic
of the buffer, shown as the black curve on
the graph.
Notice that the curve does not pass through
the shaded regions, meeting the expectations
we set out above for the behavior of a legal
combinational device.
There are two interesting observations to
be made about voltage transfer characteristics.
Let's look more carefully at the white region
in the center of the graph, corresponding
to input voltages in the range V_IL to V_IH.
First note that these input voltages are in
the forbidden zone of our signaling specification
and so a combinational device can produce
any output voltage it likes and still obey
the static discipline, which only constrains
the device's behavior for *valid* inputs.
Second, note that the center white region
bounded by the four voltage thresholds is
taller than it is wide.
This is true because our signaling specification
has positive noise margins, so V_OH - V_OL
is strictly greater than V_IH - V_IL.
Any curve passing through this region - as
the VTC must - has to have some portion where
the magnitude of the slope of the curve is
greater than 1.
At the point where the magnitude of the slope
of the VTC is greater than one, note that
a small change in the input voltage produces
a larger change in the output voltage.
That's what it means when the magnitude of
the slope is greater than 1.
In electrical terms, we would say the device
as a gain greater than 1 or less than -1,
where we define gain as the change in output
voltage for a given change in input voltage.
If we're considering building larger circuits
out of our combinational components, any output
can potentially be wired to some other input.
This means the range on the horizontal axis
(V_IN) has to be the same as the range on
the vertical axis (V_OUT), i.e., the graph
of VTC must be square and the VTC curve fits
inside the square.
In order to fit within the square bounds,
the VTC must change slope at some point since
we know from above there must be regions where
the magnitude of the slope is greater than
1 and it can't be greater than 1 across the
whole input range.
Devices that exhibit a change in gain across
their operating range are called nonlinear
devices.
Together these observations tell us that we
cannot only use linear devices such as resistors,
capacitors and inductors, to build combinational
devices.
We'll need nonlinear devices with gain greater
than 1.
Finding such devices is the subject of the
next chapter.